Editorial review: Document PerformanceNavigationTiming.confidence (#43528)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/performancetimingconfidence/index.md

browser-compat: api.PerformanceTimingConfidence
---

{{APIRef("Performance API")}}

The **`PerformanceTimingConfidence`** interface provides access to information that indicates whether the user agent considers returned navigation metrics to be free from external system load unrelated to the page.

For example, if a website has loaded after a browser "cold start" or session restore, its pages may load more slowly as a result. In such cases, a `low` confidence {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} would be returned for an associated performance record. On the other hand, if the browser determines a returned performance record to be representative of typical application performance, a `high` confidence value is returned.

This confidence measure is useful for developers when trying to determine whether a performance issue is a legitimate concern, or an outlier being caused by external factors.

The `PerformanceTimingConfidence` object for each navigation timing entry is accessed via the {{domxref("PerformanceNavigationTiming")}} interface's {{domxref("PerformanceNavigationTiming.confidence", "confidence")}} property.

## Interpreting confidence data

> Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates. The procedure below illustrates how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics.

Reviewer: I didn't want to write new prose for @mwjacksonmsft here, but went looking for existing text on the subject.

The spec doesn't really elaborate, but the original [design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1D6DqptsCEd3wPRsZ0q1iwVBAXXmhxZuLV-KKFI0ptCg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.7nki9mck5t64) does.

Stealing from there:

> ### **Summary**
> 
> Web applications may suffer from bimodal distribution in page load performance, due to factors outside of the web application’s control. For example:
> 
> * When a user agent first launches (a "cold start" scenario), it must perform many expensive initialization tasks that compete for resources on the system.  
> * Browser extensions can affect the performance of a website. For instance, some extensions run additional code on every page you visit, which can increase CPU usage and result in slower response times.  
> * When a machine is busy performing intensive tasks, it can lead to slower loading of web pages.
> 
> In these scenarios, content the web app attempts to load will be in competition with other work happening on the system. This makes it difficult to detect if performance issues exist within web applications themselves, or because of external factors.
> 
> Teams we have worked with have been surprised at the difference between real-world dashboard metrics and what they observe in page profiling tools. Without more information, it is challenging for developers to understand if (and when) their applications may be misbehaving or are simply being loaded in a contended period.
> 
> A new ‘confidence’ field on the PerformanceNavigationTiming object will enable developers to discern if the navigation timings are representative for their web application.

> Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates. The procedure below illustrates how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics.

Reviewer: Also, re-reading this patch, the description in the main navigation timing doc section `Performance timing confidence` seems to answer these questions already, so may just need linking to?

---

If the question here is even more broad, such as: why do developers measure performance in the field? Then I would also point to existing docs on the subject rather than answer them here.

The point of this feature (`confidence`) is to help segment field data into two distinct groups, with the observation that the high-confidence results are more stable over time, but the relative distribution between the groups can change.

> Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates. The procedure below illustrates how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics.

Author: OK, thanks. I've done some research of my own, and added a bit of information on why unbiased aggregates are needed.

It seems to me that summary statistics just refers to the statistics you produce from the raw data, which you actually give people to read. I therefore don't think this needs a huge amount of explanation, but I have added a few more words to indicate that they are statistics based on the confidence data.

@hamishwillee, let me know what you think.

> Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates. The procedure below illustrates how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics.

Reviewer 2: The comment @mmocny left captures the why. 

> Teams we have worked with have been surprised at the difference between real-world dashboard metrics and what they observe in page profiling tools. Without more information, it is challenging for developers to understand if (and when) their applications may be misbehaving or are simply being loaded in a contended period.

Developers can debias the data, and then focus on measuring and improving perf for things under their control.

> Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates. The procedure below illustrates how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics.

Author: Thanks, @mwjacksonmsft. I've added a couple more sentences to capture some of these thoughts.

> [!NOTE]
> Device factors such as CPU do not contribute to the performance assessment. Other factors than browser "cold start" and session restore may be taken into account in future updates.

This confidence measure is useful for developers when trying to determine whether a performance issue is a legitimate concern, or an outlier being caused by external factors. There is often a significant difference between real-world dashboard metrics and performance observations in page profiling tools.

### Interpreting confidence data

Since the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates, to improve consistency of data, cut down on compound errors, and generally produce more realistic and reliable results. The procedures below illustrate how weighting based on {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} can be applied before computing summary statistics based on the confidence data.

> Once you have debiased the data and computed realistic summary statistics, you can focus on measuring and improving performance for issues under your control.

Reviewer 3: @chrisdavidmills Same problem as I highlighted before - I didn't understand the "point" from this text and what you would do when you have the debiased data. 
I asked Claude if this paragraph was just marketing and apparently it isn't :-). Apparently  the term "recover unbiased aggregates" means something :-)

The point that is a bit buried is that `value` is not deterministic. The browser uses randomization to assign "high" or "low". When `p = 0.1` (say), it means 10% of the time the value you see was randomly assigned regardless of actual conditions.

So you can't just filter out "low" records and average the "high" ones to work out your real performance — you'd be throwing away records that were actually fine but happened to get a random "low", and keeping records that were actually bad but got a random "high".

The debiasing math corrects for the random noise so that your aggregate statistics (mean, p75, etc.) are statistically valid.  This is what the paragraph above did not make clear to me. Perhaps I am dim.

Claude says that what I'd do with the data if collecting navigation timing data (e.g. for a real-user monitoring dashboard):

1. Collect records via `PerformanceObserver` as normal.
2. For each record, also grab `entry.confidence.value` and `entry.confidence.randomizedTriggerRate`.
3. When computing your p75 LCP or mean load time, apply the weighting formulas instead of a plain average — this gives you separate, corrected metrics for "typical" loads vs. "degraded" loads.
4. Use the `"high"` confidence mean/percentile as your "real" performance baseline, and use the `"low"` one to understand how bad things get in cold-start scenarios.

This last bit is what I meant by "what do you do with the data" - use it as a new baseline.

Does my problem now make sense?

Author: This kind of makes more sense now. I've plugged the stuff you've provided above into my doc and committed it. Better?

  - : A number indicating how often noise is applied when exposing the `value`.
- {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value")}} {{ReadOnlyInline}}
  - : An enumerated value indicating a broad confidence measure of whether a performance record reflects typical application performance, or is likely affected by external factors.

## Instance methods

- {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.toJSON()")}}
  - : Returns a JSON representation of the `PerformanceTimingConfidence` object.

## Description

If a website has loaded after a browser "cold start" or session restore, its pages may load more slowly as a result. In such cases, a `low` confidence {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} is returned for an associated performance record. On the other hand, if the browser determines a returned performance record to be representative of typical application performance, a `high` confidence value is returned.

> [!NOTE]
> Device factors such as CPU do not contribute to the performance assessment. Other factors than browser "cold start" and session restore may be taken into account in future updates.

> This confidence measure is useful for developers when trying to determine whether a performance issue is a legitimate concern, or an outlier being caused by external factors. There is often a significant difference between real-world dashboard metrics and performance observations in page profiling tools.

Reviewer 3: Later on you already need to know about randomisation - see https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/43528/changes#r3246340693

Lets improve this so that "using the data" makes sense. This is mostly your own words restructured.

```suggestion
If a website has loaded after a browser "cold start" or session restore, its pages may load more slowly as a result. 
This can cause a significant difference between real-world dashboard metrics and performance observations in page profiling tools, making it hard for a developer to understand whether a performance issue is a legitimate concern or an outlier caused by external factors.

The `PerformanceTimingConfidence` interface allows developers to compensate for this problem by returning a browser estimate (in the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} property) of the likelihood that a returned performance record represents typical application performance.
This is a value of either `"low"` or `"high"`, indicating the browser's confidence in the measurement.

> [!NOTE]
> Device factors such as CPU do not contribute to the performance assessment. Other factors than browser "cold start" and session restore may be taken into account in future updates.

To reduce the possibility of using the value for fingerprinting, noise is added to the estimate, meaning the `value` will deliberately be wrong for some proportion of results.
The trigger rate for the noise is given in the {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} property.

Since this can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates, to improve data consistency, reduce the number of compound errors, and generally to produce a baseline against which the measured results can be evaluated.
```

Author: OK, I've edited this suggestion a bit, but it reads well. Thanks.

### Using the data

> Since the `randomizedTriggerRate` can vary across records, per-record weighting is needed to recover unbiased aggregates, to improve consistency of data, cut down on compound errors, and generally produce more realistic and reliable results. You should use the data as follows, to get effective results:

Reviewer 3: Nearly!

At this point the user doesn't know about `randomizedTriggerRate` - other than it has noise.  I have proposed an into above in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/43528/changes#r3246332436

Then ...

```suggestion
You should use the data as follows to extract meaninful information from the randomized values:
```

1. When collecting {{domxref("PerformanceNavigationTiming")}} records, collect {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.randomizedTriggerRate", "randomizedTriggerRate")}} and {{domxref("PerformanceTimingConfidence.value", "value")}} for each record.

> 2. When computing statistics such as p75 {{glossary("Largest_contentful_paint", "LCP")}} or mean {{glossary("page load time")}}, apply the weighting formulas explained below instead of a plain average — this gives you separate, corrected metrics for "typical" loads vs. "degraded" loads.

Reviewer 3: Jargon 75p, and LCP undefined here.

```suggestion
2. When computing statistics such as 75th-percentile {{glossary("Largest_contentful_paint", "Largest contentful paint (LCP)")}} or mean {{glossary("page load time")}}, apply the weighting formulas explained below instead of a plain average — this gives you separate, corrected metrics for "typical" loads vs. "degraded" loads.
```

Author: Well, I linked to the LCP page for those who don't know, and even I know what 75p means, being someone who has very limited knowledge of statistics. 

But I'm not going to argue with you. I just want to see this one put to bed now.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough on LCP, but clearly my limited knowledge is even more limited, because I didn't know/remember what 75p was. Thanks for accepting.
